A function in Python is a block of reusable code that performs a specific task.

Instead of writing the same code again and again, we define a function once and call it whenever needed.

Functions help in:
1. Code reusability
2. Reducing repetition
3. Making program organized
4. Improving readability

A function runs only when it is called.

syntax:
def function_name(parameters):
    statements


-- Types of Functions in Python:

1️⃣ Built-in Functions
These are predefined functions provided by Python.
Example: print(), len(), type(), sum()

2️⃣ User-defined Functions
Functions created by the programmer using the def keyword.
Example:

def add(a, b):
    return a + b

3️⃣ Functions with Parameters
Functions that accept input values.
Example: def add(a, b):

4️⃣ Functions with Return Values
Functions that return a value using the return statement.

5️⃣ Lambda Functions
Small anonymous functions defined using lambda keyword.



Q2: Explain User Defined Function with Example.

A user-defined function is a function that is created by the programmer to perform a specific task.

Unlike built-in functions (like print() or len()), user-defined functions are written using the def keyword.

They help:

1. Break large programs into smaller parts

2. Avoid repetition

3. Improve readability

4. Make debugging easier

synax:
def function_name(parameters):
    statements
    return value

def → keyword to define function
function_name → name of the function
parameters → input values (optional)
return → sends result back (optional)

def add(a, b):
    result = a + b
    return result

sum = add(10, 5)
print("Sum is:", sum)

oCnclusion:

Thus, user-defined functions allow programmers to create customized functions according to program requirements and make the program structured and reusable.



Q3: Explain Function with Parameters and Return Values

A function with parameters means the function takes input values.

A function with return value means the function sends a result back to the place where it was called.

So:

Parameters → Input

Return → Output

This makes the function flexible and reusable.


def function_name(parameter1, parameter2):
    statements
    return value


def add(a, b):
    sum = a + b
    return sum

result = add(10, 5)
print("Sum is:", result)

Importance:

Functions with parameters and return values make programs:

1. More flexible

2. Reusable

3. Easy to test

4. Easy to maintain




Q4: Explain Global and Local Variables in Python

-- Scope means:
👉 The area of the program where a variable can be accessed.

🟦 Simple Understanding (Concept First)


In Python, variables can be defined:
Inside a function
Outside a function

Depending on where they are defined, their scope (visibility) changes.

Local Variable → Created inside a function. It works only inside that function.

Global Variable → Created outside all functions. It can be accessed throughout the program.



3️⃣ Important Scope Rule (Very Important)

If a variable is assigned inside a function, Python treats it as a local variable for that entire function.

This can cause an error if we try to use it before assigning.

Tricky Example:
x = 10

def test():
    print(x)
    x = 5

test()

This produces an error.